---
layout: post
title:  "2 poems"
date:   2025-06-18 08:39:42 -0000
categories: jekyll update
---
two poems written during the winter <br>

inspired by ursula k le guin, jackie wang, e e cummings, positive dialectics, student protesters, and skeptical faith
<br>
<br>
<i>Trans-Actions of Care </i>
<br>
<br>
You were cradling the wailing stone <br>
as long as its pitch matched the din <br>
of the pigeons flapping wings. <br>
In the moment, where he startled them, <br>
scattering grey in the cool sky <br>
behind the draped figure gasping for air, <br>
I heard the thud of the wailing stone <br>
cracking the plaza with its heaving sigh <br>
opening the fleshy earth to the prick of our spiked bodies <br>
interlaced in dived diversions of the wailing stone’s churning path. <br>
<br>
Did you know the wailing stone <br>
cries softly in blues and yellows <br>
the same that dot the rushing stream <br>
where canaries carry tuna in their erect beak? <br>
<br>
I could never hold the wailing stone <br>
my hands crack under shrill asks <br>
the prying of compassion slices through a cooled granite <br>
fragments fall into the rushing concrete <br>
a slimy joy found in shattered serenity. <br>
<br>
Did you hear how they composed the wailing stone <br>
of furtive glances, bit lips, and auburn eyelashes <br>
the collapsing faces along the ridge of discontent <br>
an impasse extending from gasps to grasped silence <br>
in heavy words of the mason’s code. <br>
<br>
I never heard what the wailing stone said <br>
I only heard it scream. <br>
<br>
<br>
<i> untitled </i>
<br>
<br>
In the broken voice <br>
Squeaks through <br>
A half-remembered vestige of prestige <br>
Yearn for after-thoughts <br>
That tumbled from Giants’ lips <br>
Before landing in the reflective pool <br>
Of scratched pages. <br>
<br>
At the table <br>
carvings and theses <br>
strewn about on dinner plates <br>
that clattered in tongues <br>
I’d tried to nail down <br>
In their squirming place. <br>
<br>
Vanity’s auburn hair <br>
The cracked skin of an unsure handshake <br>
Arms and legs contort in fractal spiderwebs <br>
Are you the seeker of an ambivalent gaze <br>
Or the follower of a mismatched path? <br>
<br>
Neglected pleasantries, distorted apologies <br>
The clarity of smudged vision <br>
Within the cracked wide-angle lens <br>
How brave to not encase <br>
This graveyard of cadmium and zinc <br>
That shrinks the horizon <br>
Into a bottomless tin <br>
<br>
Oh vanity,<br>
Discard me <br>
From the divine asymmetry <br>
